# Future Green Countries 

## Introduction
FutureGreenCountriesML is an ongoing machine learning project that currently forecasts the renewable energy share of 39 different countries from the years 2023-2035. Renewable energy share is the percent of electricity generation derived from renewable sources which generally includes solar, wind, hydro, geothermal, and biomass. In this project, the "true renewable share" is defined as electricity generation that comes from solar, wind, hydro, geothermal, tide, and solar thermal sources. Thus, the "true renewable share" includes sources that are both renewable and clean, a design choice made to eliminate the controversies revolving around the safety of nuclear energy despite it being a clean but not renewable energy source, and biomass, a renewable but arguably not very clean energy source. The purpose of "green forecasting" is to help us understand where some of the world's major powers stand in regards to achieving coming climate goals. Analyzing the current trajectory of a country's energy transition can impact climate and economic policy, as countries focus on making the world a greener place. It can also highlight the leaders, whose example, infrastrucutre, and policy can be followed. On the other hand, it reveals the slackers who can realize where and why they are lacking and pivot to the renewable sources that work best for them. 

## Data and Sources

The data used for the project was sourced from the International Energy Agency (IEA) via their excel sheets they provide on various data points. The data points used directy from the IEA include the Total Energy Supply (TES) by source, Total Final Consumption [of energy] (TFC) by source, Total CO2 Emissions and their sources, Electricity Generation by source, Total Electricity Consumption, C02 Emissions per capita. GDP per capita is the final sourced data point, supplied by the World Bank Group. Of the 39 countries reported on, 32 are the official Memeber countries of the IEA with legal obligations and rights, 5 are Association countries who cannot vote but and cooperate with less strict bounds and there is 1 Accession country, a country in the process of becoming a member. The final country who doesn't cooperate with the IEA at all is Russia, so their data is monitored through independent analysis and monitoring their trade with other countries. Data is taken from the years 2000-2022 for a modernized approach to the model as well as for reliability. A majority of the data are numbers straight from the IEA reports, while any missing points are extrapolated based preceeding and following years as well as supplemented by Our World in Data only if both the IEA and Our World in Data had similar numbers regarding non-missing data. 

## What is a Random Forest in Machine Learning?

Machine learning is the process of feeding a model, like Random Forests, a data set and training the model on that data. Training means that the computer tries to make predictions about data it has not seen, based on the data is has been feed. 
A Random Forest is a collection of decision trees that are formed by "Bootstrapping" data where each decision tree uses of different subset of data points taken from the main data set. These decision trees then make predictions based on certain conditions and these predictions are then each combined into a single point, "aggregating" the data. The Randomness comes from the random selection of data points for each decision tree, so the model is less sensitive to the training data. These different data subsets per tree also allows the trees to not be as correlated to one another, giving varied predictions. Variance is important because 

## The Three Models: Linear, Static, Dynamic 

The three models used include a linear model, a static random forest model, and a dynamic random forest model. The linear model acts as a baseline, using the renewable share of each country from 2000-2022 as a slope to forecast what 2023-2035 would like. In other words past years show that the renewable share grows at some x% and will continue to grow at that rate through 2035. This means the linear model is only influenced by a singular data point, the true renewable share defined above. 
The static model uses the energy data from the year 2022 for each country and predicts the following year's change in renewable share. The the features that predict the renewable share will not change year-to-year, hence a static model, as it continously uses energy data from 2022 for each consecutive year. This differs from the linear model as it is not an average rate of change, but rather a consistent application of the random forest model. 
The dynamic model uses the same random forest model as the static model, but instead of using 2022 for each year's renewable energy share forecast, an approximation is made year by year via applying the median annual change in each of a country's energy features from 2000-2022. Thus, forecasts will vary each year due to fluctuation in data points, mimicing the actual world much more closely. 

## Model Performance Summary 
We use Mean Squared Error (MSE) and R2 Score to test the accuracy of our training and testing models relative to our actual data set. MSE measures the average squared difference between predicted and actual values, while R2 score measures how well a regression model explains the variance of the predicted variable. 
*insert picture of rf3_results* 
For training MSE, the predicted values and actual values only differ around 0.02%, demonstrating almost a perfect fit.
For training R2, the model explains around 85% of the variance in the training data, so it fits the data well. 
For testing MSE, the predicted and actual values differ by 0.14% showing the model is slightly less accurate when facing new data, though still a good fit.
For testing R2, the model only explains around 6% of the variance in the testing data. Thus is due to the fact that the testing years are from 2019-2021, thus the data is impacted severly by the effects of COVID-19. The design choice to keep the training and testing years as is instead of shifting the years used to 1995-2017 for example is to add realism as the pandemic was an unfortunate reality that we cannot erase, but it does allow us to prepare better for future happenings and the severity of their impacts. Thus, keeping the model years the same allows for the most modern data to be used, also an important matter as the world continues to change and advance, and attempt to model how the world has responded to a post-COVID world as well as eliminating a false reality of plaining forecasting the period in which we experienced COVID if we shifted to our final testing year to be 2017. 

## Key Findings 
Of the three models, the dynamic model performs the best, as hoped. Though, it is important to note that all three models have different countries in which they each perform the best. The dynamic model is strong on a majority of countries, highlighting volatily and its abiltiy to perform under varying data between countries. It also provides a sense of realism and "optimism" as the forecasting line fluctuates, unlike the linear and static forecasts, and the data accelerates like we see in Korea, Ireland, Greece, and more. The static model follows the dynamic model closely, showing   

## Instructions 